Add blog post about GolangCI-Lint (#483)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/blog/2020-01-08-incorporating-golangci-lint.md

---
title: Incorporating GolangCI-Lint at Mattermost
slug: incorporating-golangci-lint
date: 2020-01-08
categories:
    - "go"
    - “linting”
author: Agniva De Sarker
github: agnivade
community: agnivade
author_2: Ben Schumacher
github_2: hanzei
community_2: hanzei
---

> At Mattermost, we have traditionally relied on the trusty `go vet` and `gofmt` checks for our CI runs. While that is great, there were a lot of other powerful linters out there which we were missing out on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Mattermost, we have traditionally relied on the trusty `go vet` and `gofmt` checks for our CI runs. Although it works well, there are a lot of other powerful linters out there which we're potentially missing out on.
```

> Speaking of linters, the first name that inevitably comes up is [staticcheck](https://staticcheck.io/). It is a powerful metalinter with a whole slew of checks. But simply running staticcheck was not sufficient, because it missed out on other linters which did one little thing, but nevertheless were very powerful. A few popular ones are [ineffassign](https://github.com/gordonklaus/ineffassign), [errcheck](https://github.com/kisielk/errcheck), [unconvert](https://github.com/mdempsky/unconvert), [deadcode](https://github.com/remyoudompheng/go-misc/tree/master/deadcode), [structcheck](https://gitlab.com/opennota/check/tree/master/cmd/structcheck) amongst others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Speaking of linters, the first name that inevitably comes up is [staticcheck](https://staticcheck.io/). It's a powerful metalinter with a whole slew of checks. But simply running staticcheck is not sufficient, because it misses out on other linters which perform a single task, but nevertheless are very powerful. A few popular ones are [ineffassign](https://github.com/gordonklaus/ineffassign), [errcheck](https://github.com/kisielk/errcheck), [unconvert](https://github.com/mdempsky/unconvert), [deadcode](https://github.com/remyoudompheng/go-misc/tree/master/deadcode), and [structcheck](https://gitlab.com/opennota/check/tree/master/cmd/structcheck) among others.
```

> We needed a way to run all of these linters together and efficiently too. Gometalinter was a pioneer in this field by providing a way to run multiple linters together. Unfortunately, it did this by shelling out to the linters and running them, which made it very inefficient. To its defence, using all the linters as a library was also equally hard, because there wasn’t any standard API that all of them could use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We needed a way to run all of these linters together and efficiently too. Gometalinter was a pioneer in this field by providing a way to run multiple linters together. Unfortunately, it did this by shelling out to the linters and running them, which made it very inefficient. In its defense, using all the linters as a library was also equally hard, because there wasn’t any standard API that all of them could use.
```

But the introduction of the `golang.org/x/tools/go/analysis` package during the 1.12 cycle was a game-changer. It introduced a standard API for writing Go static analyzers, which allowed them to be easily shared with the rest of the ecosystem in a plug-and-play model. Finally the One Ring to rule them all!

> Unsurprisingly, not before too long, GolangCI-Lint came up on the horizon. It used the go/analysis API to load all the linters and ran them concurrently, leading to a drastic reduction in memory and improvement in speed; becoming the successor to Gometalinter which is deprecated now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unsurprisingly, before too long, GolangCI-Lint came up on the horizon. It used the go/analysis API to load all the linters and ran them concurrently, leading to a drastic reduction in memory and improvement in speed; becoming the successor to Gometalinter which is deprecated now.
```

The writing was on the wall. GolangCI-Lint was the right choice. Following is an account of how we integrated it into our codebase.

#### Integrating GolangCI-Lint into our CI

> Right off the bat, there was a big question mark hanging over our heads. It would be very, _very_ painful to have to fix _all_ the issues in our codebase before enforcing it as a CI check, by which time, new issues would have creeped in. It would be a never-ending chase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Right off the bat, there was a big question mark hanging over our heads. It would be very, _very_ painful to have to fix _all_ the issues in our codebase before enforcing it as a CI check, by which time, new issues would have crept in. It would be a never-ending chase.
```

> Fortunately, GolangCI-Lint provides us with a `--new-from-rev=HEAD~1` option which allowed it to check only code added in the latest commit. This gives us breathing room to enable the check in our CI and retroactively fix all the old issues. Granted, that it won’t catch issues for PRs with more than one commit, but it’s a start and we planned to lift this restriction anyways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fortunately, GolangCI-Lint provides us with a `--new-from-rev=HEAD~1` option which allows it to check only code added in the latest commit. This gives us breathing room to enable the check in our CI and retroactively fix all the old issues. Granted, it won’t catch issues for PRs with more than one commit, but it’s a start and we planned to lift this restriction anyways.
```

> We also decided to start off with the Github [check](https://golangci.com/) which relieves any CI setup burden on our side. This check helps community members spot linter issues at first glance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also decided to start off with the GitHub [check](https://golangci.com/) which relieves any CI setup burden on our side. This check helps community members spot linter issues at first glance.
```

> #### Deciding the initial set of linters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Selecting the Initial Set of Linters
```

> So with that taken care of, our next task was to decide on a set of linters to start off with. We could not begin with a huge set because first of all, it will take longer to run. And secondly, it would further delay our target of fixing all the issues already existing in our codebase. We needed a small but good enough set of linters that would catch effective issues, but wouldn’t take too long to fix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So with that taken care of, our next task was to decide on a set of linters to start off with. We couldn't begin with a huge set because first of all, it would take longer to run. Additionally, it would further delay our target of fixing all the  existing issues in our codebase. We needed a small but powerful set of linters that would catch effective issues, but wouldn’t take too long to fix.
```

> After some trial and error, we settled down on [these](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/e2a2a1a5bce69f153e6e095e07dadf92b64df699/.golangci.yml#L18-L26).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After some trial and error, we settled on [these](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/e2a2a1a5bce69f153e6e095e07dadf92b64df699/.golangci.yml#L18-L26).
```

We chose not to include `staticcheck` for the first cut because a lot of the functionality was already provided by the other linters. We also did not include `errcheck` because it uncovered _too_ many issues which did not look likely to be fixed within a reasonable time frame.

> #### What issues did it uncover?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### What Issues were Uncovered?
```

> Most issues fixed in the process where stylistic nature. We fixed [formatting issues](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12943), [removed unnecessary](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12928) [code](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12927), [removed](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12924) [a lot of](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12968), [unused](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12929) [code](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12926). These fixes are great to keep the code base clean and consistent but have no impact on the behaviour of the software and did not reveal any bugs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the issues fixed in the process were stylistic. We fixed [formatting issues](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12943), [removed unnecessary](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12928) [code](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12927), and [removed](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12924) [a lot of](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12968), [unused](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12929) [code](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/pull/12926). These fixes are great to keep the code base clean and consistent but have no impact on the behavior of the software and did not reveal any bugs.
```

The more interesting issues were found by `ineffassign` and `govet`.

> `ineffassign` reports instances where a value was assigned to a variable but the value never used. We found two instances in test files where we didn’t not check a returned valued. Although it’s a minor improvement, it’s still great to fix these issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ineffassign` reports instances where a value was assigned to a variable but not used. We found two instances in test files where we didn’t validate a returned valued. Although it’s a minor improvement, it’s still great to fix these issues.
```

> The most interesting issue where found by `govet`. Take a look at this code piece:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most interesting issue where found by `govet`. Take a look at this code sample:
```

```go

> 	obj, err := us.GetReplica().Get(model.Compliance{}, id)

Reviewer 2: Let's remove the preceding tabs from these lines. They appear in the markdown which push the code to the right.

if err != nil {
	return nil, model.NewAppError("SqlComplianceStore.Get", "store.sql_compliance.get.finding.app_error", nil, err.Error(), http.StatusInternalServerError)
}
if obj == nil {
	return nil, model.NewAppError("SqlComplianceStore.Get", "store.sql_compliance.get.finding.app_error", nil, err.Error(), http.StatusNotFound)
}
```

> Looks fine, doesn’t it? Except it contains a null pointer exception. At the second `return` we know that `err == nil` and hence `err.Error()` will panic. `govet` found this issue and [we fixed it](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-c5a8591c69e26808c8171db5d5dddef7L78-R78). There were [actually](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-92d8335ab3456e9fd16cb67c739c52e0R163-R165), [a](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-2c6106afe8477623894c02707bffe06dL622-R622) [couple](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-0425a0737e8b051835b0978d034d22fcL139-R139), [of](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-32736de6a4585a5384f7606e57b2792fR269-R290) [issues](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-2c6106afe8477623894c02707bffe06dL589-R589) like this one. Finding these issues alone has been a huge success and proven that linter can help fix bugs before they occur in a production environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Looks fine, doesn’t it? Except it contains a null pointer exception. At the second `return` we know that `err == nil` and hence `err.Error()` will panic. `govet` found this issue and [we fixed it](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-c5a8591c69e26808c8171db5d5dddef7L78-R78). 

There were [actually](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-92d8335ab3456e9fd16cb67c739c52e0R163-R165), [a](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-2c6106afe8477623894c02707bffe06dL622-R622) [couple](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-0425a0737e8b051835b0978d034d22fcL139-R139), [of](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-32736de6a4585a5384f7606e57b2792fR269-R290) [issues](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-2c6106afe8477623894c02707bffe06dL589-R589) like this one. Finding these issues alone has been a huge success and proved that linters can help fix bugs before they occur in a production environment.
```

Another issue found by `govet` lies in this piece of code:
```go

> 		newSecret := &model.SystemPostActionCookieSecret{

Reviewer 2: Same as above. Let's remove the gap.

}
_, err := rand.Reader.Read(newSecret.Secret)
if err != nil {
	return err
}

system := &model.System{
	Name: model.SYSTEM_POST_ACTION_COOKIE_SECRET,
}
v, err := json.Marshal(newSecret)
if err != nil {
	return err
}
system.Value = string(v)
// If we were able to save the key, use it, otherwise log the error.
if err = a.Srv.Store.System().Save(system); err == nil {
	secret = newSecret
}
```

`a.Srv.Store.System().Save` returns a custom error type `model.AppError`, that is commonly used in the Mattermost code base. But assigning this custom error to the variable `err` of type `error` results in variable that will never be `nil`. Hence, the line `secret = newSecret` will never be reached. This is [a common gotcha in Go](https://golang.org/doc/faq#nil_error). Using a dedicated variable for the custom error is the right way to fix this.
We found and fixed [two](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-76e64b305c25e308c6b9f4c2fa572c51R204-R207) of these [issues](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/commit/812c40a30703efd159675a1ff1b26a64f18b14d0#diff-76e64b305c25e308c6b9f4c2fa572c51R142-R144).

> #### What issues did we encounter while integrating GolangCI-Lint?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### What Issues were Encountered During the GolangCI-Lint Integration?
```

WARN [runner] Can't run linter goanalysis_metalinter: structcheck: analysis skipped: errors in package: [/home/agniva/play/go/src/github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/wsapi/api.go:7:2: could not import github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/v5/app (/home/agniva/play/go/src/github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/app/channel.go:1889:64: missing ',' before newline in argument list)] 
```

Compare that to the `go vet` output:

```
# github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/v5/app
app/channel.go:1889:64: syntax error: unexpected newline, expecting comma or )
# github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/v5/app
vet: app/channel.go:1889:64: missing ',' before newline in argument list (and 10 more errors)
```

The warnings which should have been an error already had an [issue](https://github.com/golangci/golangci-lint/issues/866). We filed another [one](https://github.com/golangci/golangci-lint/issues/886) for the poor syntax errors.

Lastly, we just wanted to touch upon something that might be surprising to new Gophers out there. Mattermost has a very thin enterprise layer which gets built by including the directory as a symlink from inside the open-source repo.

> While running golangci-lint with the enterprise layer included, we observed that it was failing to run the checks inside the symlink. This is due to the fact that the Go toolchain does not work very well with symlinks. As a simple fix, we added another [command](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/f672eb729103ef0c8512a3facb48d44c386cd00a/Makefile#L163) to run that directory specifically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While running GolangCI-Lint with the enterprise layer included, we observed that it was failing to run the checks inside the symlink. This is due to the fact that the Go toolchain does not work very well with symlinks. As a simple fix, we added another [command](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/f672eb729103ef0c8512a3facb48d44c386cd00a/Makefile#L163) to run that directory specifically.
```

#### Future Work

Now that we have a base in place, our plan is to add more linters. Here is a short wish-list for the near term, roughly in the order of priority:

> __errcheck__: This got missed out in our initial cut because the work involved was too big. It is one of the most common mistakes in Go code, and extremely important that these get caught.

Reviewer 2: Could you separate each of these sections into paragraphs ? The markdown combines all of them into a single para, which becomes unreadable.

Author: Added bullet point for each of them
